Initial Setup for personal RPI

(last modification 8/april/2015 12:07 AM)

Preliminaries

    To reset the Raspian OS, hold shift while the RPI is booting.
    Install raspbian and change the language to US english for the "#" sign with the "9" key and the "l" key.

    Once Raspian has been installed, the "raspi-config" program will run. Here, you can change the user's
    (the default user is "pi") password. To navigate the "raspi-config" program, use the arrow keys and TAB.
    Enable the RPI camera module and overclock the RPI to 900MHz (medium setting). To enable SSH go to the
    advanced options. Then finish and reboot the RPI.

    Once you sign in with the new password (if you didn't change the password, the default is "raspberry") you
    can start the GUI with the command

        startx
    
Basic Updates and Programs    
    
    Now update the repositories with:

        sudo apt-get update
    
    This will update the repositories so you can update the RPI with:

        sudo apt-get upgrade
    
    Then remove all the redundant packages from this last installation with the command:

        sudo apt-get autoremove
    
    Now we install the first basic programs:

        sudo apt-get install mc arduino texlive w3m tightvncserver libreoffice-calc
    
    where mc is a command line folder manager, arduino is the IDE to control the arduino microcontroller.
    texlive is the LaTeX compiler and w3m is the command line html viewer. "libreoffice-calc" is a spreadsheet
    program. To set up the VNC server, just
    run the program
    
        tightvncserver
        
    The port used can be found by checking the log generated by "tightvncserver", it is usually port 5901.
    You will be prompted for a passwordl give "sIegel19", it must be eight characters long.
    
Setting Up Static IP Address    
    
    Next we give the RPI a fixed IP address when connected via ethernet to the internet. First we must verify
    our connection data. The command

        ifconfig eth0
    
    will give us the IP address, the broadcast IP range denoted by "Bcast" and the subnet mask denoted by
    "Mask". With the command

        netstat -nr
    
    will give you the "destination" and "gateway" address.

    Next, backup the file for the network interfaces with:

        sudo cp /etc/network/interfaces /etc/network/interfaces.backup
     
    so that we can modify the original non-destructively. Now edit the "interfaces" file:

        sudo nano /etc/network/interfaces
    
    On the third line

        iface eth0 inet dhcp
    
    change "dhcp" with "static", this will change the DHCP protocol to a fixed IP protocol. Below this line,
    enter your IP address, the subnet and your gateway address like:

        address 192.168.100.31
        netmask 255.255.255.0
        gateway 192.168.100.1
    
    where "netmask" refers to the subnet. Write out the file and reboot the RPI for the changes to take effect.
    After it is done rebooting you can verify the fixed IP with

        ifconfig
    
    or
    
        hostname -I
    
Setting UP WiFi

    To setup the WiFi dongle, connect the dongle. You can check to see if the RPI recognizes it with
        
        lsusb
        
    You can also verify if the RPI is using the correct libraries and packages with
    
        lsmod
        
    In the case of the CanaKit WiFi dongle, the name is "Ralink Technology, Corp. RT5370 Wireless Adapter"
    and the libraries the kernel should be running is "rt2800usb".
    
    If you don't know what WiFi networks there are, you can scan with the command
    
        sudo iwlist wlan0 scan
        
    It is recomended that you scan with SSH since there can be many results. This scan will give you two 
    mportant pieces of information:
    
        ESSID:"marley"
    
    and
    
        IE: IEEE 802.11i/WPA2 Version 1
        
    which give the network name and the authentication used respectively.
    
    Next backup the file
    
        sudo cp /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf.backup
        
    and then edit the file
    
        sudo nano /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
        
    and at the bottom add the following text:
    
        network={
            ssid="your_ESSID"
            psk="your_password"
        }
        
    Write out the document and save. To check if the WiFi was set, reboot the RPI without the ethernet
    connected. You should be able to find and IP address for the WiFi with
    
        ifconfig wlan0
        
Setting Up a VPN

    